it's often said that you can tell a lot
about a person by looking at what's on
their bookshelves what my bookshelf say
about me well when I asked myself this
question a few years ago I made an
alarming discovery I'd always thought of
myself as a fairly cultured cosmopolitan
sort of person but my bookshelves
told a rather different story pretty
much all the titles on them were by
British or North American authors and
there was almost nothing in translation
discovering this massive cultural blind
spot and my reading came as quite a
shock and when I thought about it it
seemed like a real shame I knew there
had to be lots of amazing stories out
there by writers working in languages
other than English and it seems really
sad to think that my reading habits
meant I would probably never encounter
them so I decided to prescribe myself an
intensive course of global reading 2012
was set to be a very international year
for the UK it was the year of the London
Olympics and so I decided to use it as
my time frame to try and read a novel
short story collection or memoir from
every country in the world and so I did
and it was very exciting and I learnt
some remarkable things and made some
wonderful connections that I want to
share with you today but it started with
some practical problems now after I'd
worked out which of the many different
lists of countries in the world to use
for my project I ended up going with the
list of UN recognized nations to which I
added Taiwan which gave me a total of
196 countries and after I'd worked out
how to fit reading and blogging about
roughly four books a week around working
five days a week I then had to face up
to the fact that I might not even be
able to get
in English from every country only
around 4.5 percent of the literary works
published each year in the UK a
translations and the figures are similar
for much of the english-speaking world
although the proportion of translated
books published in many other countries
is a lot higher 4.5 percent is tiny
enough to start with
but what that figure doesn't tell you is
that many of those books will come from
countries with strong publishing
networks and lots of industry
professionals primed to go out and sell
those titles to english-language
publishers so for example although well
over a hundred books are translated from
French published in the UK each year
most of them will come from countries
like France or Switzerland
french-speaking Africa on the other
hands will rarely ever get a look in the
upshot is that there are actually quite
a lot of nations that may have little or
even no commercially available
literature in English their books remain
invisible to readers of the world's most
published language but when it came to
reading the world the biggest challenge
of all for me was the fact that I didn't
know where to start having spent my life
reading almost exclusively British and
North American books I had no idea how
to go about sourcing and finding stories
and choosing them for much of the rest
of the world I couldn't tell you how to
source a story from Swaziland I wouldn't
know a good novel from Namibia there was
no hiding it I was a clueless literary
xenophobe so how on earth was I going to
read the world I was going to have to
ask for help and so in October 2011 I
registered my blog a year of reading the
world comm and I posted a short appeal
online I explained who I was how narrow
my reading had been and I asked anyone
who cared T to leave a message
suggesting what I might read from other
parts of the planet now I had no idea
whether anyone would be interested but
within a few hours of me posting that
appeal online people started to get in
touch now first it was friends
some colleagues men it was friends of
friends and pretty soon it was strangers
four days after I put that appeal online
I got a message from a woman called Rafa
de in Kuala lumper she said she loved
the sound of my project could she go to
her local english-language bookshop and
choose my Malaysian book and post it to
me
I accepted enthusiastically and a few
weeks later a package arrived containing
not one but two books refis destroys for
malaysia and a book from singapore that
she had also picked out for me now at
the time I was amazed that a stranger
more than 6000 miles away would go to
such lengths to help someone she would
probably never meet but refitted
kindness proved to be the pattern for
that year time and again people went out
of their way to help me some took on
research on my behalf and others made
detours on holidays and business trips
to go to book shops for me it turns out
if you want to read the world if you
want to encounter it with an open mind
the world will help you when it came to
countries with little or no commercially
available literature in English people
went further still books often came from
surprising sources my Panamanian read
for example came through a conversation
I had with the Panama Canal on Twitter
yes the Panama Canal has a Twitter
account and when I tweeted at it about
my project it suggested that I might
like to try and get hold of the work of
the Panamanian author Juan David Morgan
I found Morgan's website and I sent him
a message asking if any of his Spanish
language novels had been translated into
English he said that nothing had been
published but he did have an unpublished
translation of his novel the golden
horse he emailed this to me allowing me
to become one of the first people ever
to read that book in English
Morgan was by no means the only
wordsmith to share his work with me in
this way from Sweden to Palau writers
and translators sent me self-published
books and unpublished manuscripts of
books that hadn't been picked up by
Anglophone publishers or that were no
longer available giving me privileged
glimpses of some remarkable imaginary
worlds
I read for example about the southern
African King Ganga Nana who led the
resistance against the Portuguese in the
19th century and about marriage rituals
in a remote village on the shores of the
Caspian Sea in Turkmenistan I met a key
weights answer to Bridget Jones and I
read about an orgy in a tree in Angola
but perhaps the most amazing example of
the lengths that people were prepared to
go to to help me read the world came
towards the end of my quest when I tried
to get hold of a book from the tiny
Portuguese speaking African island
nation of serotonin and prncipe now
having spent several months trying
everything I could think of to find a
book that had been translated into
English from the nation it seemed as
though the only option left to me was to
see if I could get something translated
from scratch now I was really dubious
whether anyone was going to want to help
with this and give up their time for
something like that but within a week of
me putting a call out on Twitter and
Facebook for Portuguese speakers I had
more people than I could involve in the
project including Margaret Jocasta a
leader in her field who has translated
the work of Nobel Prize winner Jose a
Sara Marku now with my nine volunteers
in place I managed to find a book by a
Santa Mia and all so that I could buy
enough copies of online here's one of
them and I sent a copy out to each of my
volunteers they all took on a couple of
short stories from this collection stuck
to their word sent their translations
back to me and within six weeks I had
the entire book to read
in that case as I found so often during
my year of reading the world my not
knowing and being open about my
limitations had become a big opportunity
when it came to site a me and prncipe
it was a chance not only to learn
something new and discover a new
collection of stories but also to bring
together a group of people and
facilitate a joint creative endeavor my
weakness had become the project's
strength now the books I read that year
opened my eyes to many things as those
who enjoy reading will know books have
an extraordinary power to take you out
of yourself and into someone else's
mindset so that for a while at least you
look at the world through different eyes
that can be an uncomfortable experience
particularly if you're reading a book
from a culture that may have quite
different values to your own but it can
also be really enlightening wrestling
with unfamiliar ideas can help clarify
your own thinking and it can also show
up blind spots in the way you might have
been looking at the world when I looked
back at much of the English language
literature I'd grown up with for example
I began to see quite how narrow a lot of
it was compared to the richness that the
world has to offer and as the pages
turned something else started to happen
to little by little that long list of
countries that I'd started the year with
changed from a rather dry academic
register of place names into living
breathing entities now I don't want to
suggest that it's at all possible to get
a rounded picture of a country simply by
reading one book but cumulatively the
stories I read that year made me more
alive than ever before to the richness
diversity and complexity of our
remarkable planet It was as though the
world's stories and the people who'd
gone to such lengths to help me read
them have made it real to me these days
when I look at my bookshelves or
consider the works on my
eReader they tell a rather different
story
it's the story of the power books have
to connect us across political
geographical cultural social religious
divides it's the tale of the potential
human beings has to work together and
it's testament to the extraordinary
times we live in where thanks to the
internet it's easier than ever before
for a stranger to share a story a
worldview a book with someone she may
never meet on the other side of the
planet I hope it's a story I'm reading
for many years to come
and I hope many more people will join me
if we all read more widely there'd be
more incentives for publishers to
translate more books and we would all be
richer for that thank you